
# Data Check - Thematic area: Data Protection and Privacy

## Definitions

The right to privacy is defined as the right of a person ‘to be free from intrusion into or publicity concerning matters of a personal nature’ by government and/or third parties, including private entities or individuals. While the right to privacy has been provided for under various legal traditions, it first found expression as a human right in 1948 when the UN General Assembly adopted Article 12 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights (UDHR), before being enshrined as an individual right in Article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights (ICCPR). It is worth noting that the right to privacy is not an absolute right and can be limited under circumstances provided for in law, such as the protection of national security interests or in the prevention and prosecution of criminal matters.
The right to privacy has evolved to include information privacy, which is defined as the right of an individual to have control over who has access to their personal data and for what purpose. The UNESCO Principles on Personal Data Protection and Privacy define personal data as “any information relating to an individual (data subject) who can be identified from that data, either directly or indirectly” by referencing the data and by other “reasonably likely measures” that is processed by AI tools and systems.
Accordingly, the right to privacy, specifically information privacy, data protection, and data processing are closely linked. Data protection is one of the ways the right to privacy is protected by regulating the processing of personal data and information, and establishing accountability mechanisms when personal data is misused. Data processing is defined as ‘a series of manual, automatic, or electronic operations such as validating, sorting, summarising and aggregating data’ which are ‘usually followed by data retrieval, transformation, classification, analysis and reporting’.

## Identifications

This thematic area examines the steps countries have taken to protect the right to privacy and data protection in the design, development and use of AI tools and systems. In particular, evidence must account for (1) frameworks concerning AI systems, (2) government actions to implement these frameworks or address issues relating to data protection and privacy, and (3) non-state actors working on privacy and data protection in the country.
Frameworks may take the form of laws, regulations, policies (including by sector and/or department), and/or guidelines. Government actions may include the development of draft laws or policies related to data protection and privacy in respect of AI, the establishment of government working groups or oversight bodies responsible for providing policy recommendations or overseeing compliance with data protection law in the roll-out of AI systems. Non-state actors (NSAs) may include non-governmental organisations (NGOs), but also multinational corporations, private military organisations, media outlets, organised ethnic groups, academic institutions, lobby groups, labour unions or social movements working to strengthen protocols relating to data protection and privacy in the context of AI.


## Some Examples:

### Frameworks:

In response to the Canadian Government’s commitment to using artificial intelligence in a manner that is compatible with core principles of administrative law such as transparency, accountability, legality, and procedural fairness, it issued the Directive on Automated Decision-Making in April 2019. The Directive aims to ensure that automated decision systems are deployed in a manner that reduces risks to clients, federal institutions and Canadian society, and leads to more efficient, accurate, consistent and interpretable decisions made pursuant to Canadian law. Section 6.3.4 relates to data governance and calls on the Assistant Deputy Minister using an automated decision system to ‘[e]stablish[] measures to ensure that data used and generated by the automated decision system are traceable, protected and accessed appropriately, and lawfully collected, used, retained and disposed of in accordance with the Directive on Service and Digital, Directive on Privacy Practices, and Directive on Security Management.’

### Government Actions

Section 115 of the UK Data Protection Act (DPA 2018) and Article 51 of the Europe-wide General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) contain the enforcement functions and powers of the Information Commissioner's Office (ICO), which is assigned specific responsibilities for regulating individuals’ data rights. In 2018, the ICO published its Regulatory Action Policy reiterating its specific powers and outlining its specific approach to enacting its duties. In 2019, the ICO also launched its Regulatory Sandbox, which provides free services for organisations using personal data “in innovative and safe ways” to help prevent and mitigate harms to people’s right to privacy and risks to data protection, especially by embedding data protection in design and development of AI systems and tools.

### Non-state Actors

In Kenya, Paradigm Initiative proposes policy solutions, such as this one recommending government measures for data protection, as well as monitors legal and policy frameworks concerning Information and Communication Technologies (ICTs) across Africa to ensure the protection of citizens’ digital rights. The organisation also trains nonprofits and educational institutions “in the use of ICTs for digital security, online and social media advocacy, etc.” and has established a Digital Rights Academy Program with the aim of “building the capacity of Africa civil society organisations, journalists, advocates and others to understand, advocate and defend digital rights.” The London-based organisation Privacy International has published a data protection guide which can be applied to AI technologies.

## Search Term Guidance Helper

- Parliamentary or government records for recent mentions of ‘data protection and AI’, ‘right to privacy and AI’, ‘privacy and AI’.

- Other key search terms include ‘data processing’, ‘data collection’ and ‘transparency’ with respect to data while key reference terms in frameworks include ‘data controller’, ‘data processor’ and ‘data subject’ in the context of AI.
