
# Thematic area: National AI Policy

## Definitions:

A National AI Policy can be defined as 'a course or principle of action adopted orformally agreed to by the government in relation to the country's approach to AI.
Policies are distinct from laws insofar as their purpose is to guide the approach ofgovernment with respect to a particular issue , while laws and regulations provide aset of rules that must be complied with when dealing with the particular issue.
Although policies are often the 'starting place' from which laws are developed, theydo not carry the same legal weight as laws or regulations, and often cannot belegally enforced. That said, they are essential when it comes to articulating acohesive strategy for how the country intends to deal with the challenges andopportunities posed by AI, and for presenting a set of principles that will guide theactions of government and other actors in relation to AI.

## Research Guidance:
This thematic area assesses the existence of a national AI policy and/or strategy. Itdoes not assess the content of this policy in much detail since those issues will becovered by other thematic areas in the Global Index. Only policies adopted by thenational government will be considered as evidence for 'frameworks' under thisthematic area. Draft policies or government agendas in relation to AI that have yetto be adopted by the national government will be considered as evidence under'government actions', not 'frameworks'.
Evidence collected for non-state actors should look at those working to advance theadoption or development of a national AI policy.

## Identification:
This thematic area measures steps countries have taken to promote the adoption of National AI Policies governing the design, development, use and deployment of AItechnologies. In particular, evidence must account for (1) national AI policyframeworks, (2) government actions to develop and/or implement national AIpolicies, and (3) actors outside government working to advance, enable or enforcenational AI policy.
Frameworks May take the form of adopted policies, white papers, or strategies.
Government actions may include draft policies, the establishment of governmentbodies or task teams to conduct research pertaining to AI or lead the developmentof AI-related policy, such as a department or agency within the Ministry of Scienceand Technology. Non-State Actors (NSAs) may include non-governmental
organisations (NGOs), but also multinational corporations, private militaryorganisations, media outlets, organised ethnic groups, academic institutions, lobbygroups, labour unions or social movements, that support the development orimplementation of a national AI policy.

## Examples:

### Frameworks:

Since 2020, the government of Rwanda has been working closely to position thecountry as a 'frontrunner in Africa' with respect to AI. Central to this effort hasbeen development of a national AI policy , which was adopted by Cabinet in April2023. . In addition to articulating a roadmap for how AI can be leveraged to supportthe socioeconomic transformation of Rwanda and to achieve progress towards the SDGs, the policy creates a roadmap with clear objectives for the country. Morespecifically, Rwanda's national policy identifies six priority areas guiding thecountry's approach to AI, which includes the following: (1) 21st century skills andhigh AI literacy; (2) reliable infrastructure and compute capacity; (3) thedevelopment of a Robust Data Strategy; (4) adoption of trustworthy AI in the publicsector; (5) widely beneficial AI adoption in the private sector; and (6) developmentof Practical Ethical Guidelines for AI.

### Government Actions:
The Ministry of ICT and Innovation (MINICT) and Rwanda Utilities Regulatory Agency (RURA) has been spearheading the implementation of Rwanda's National AIstrategy, with support from key partners, stakeholders and international donors,including the Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit (GIZ). As aresult, both MINICT and RURA have been working to advance the development of Ethical Guidelines and a practical implementation plan , with support fromindependent organisations, such as The Future Society and Centre for the 4th Industrial Revolution (C4IR), to support effective implementation of its National AIPolicy.

### Non-State Actors:
The Digital Transformation Centre (DTC) in Rwanda is an 'innovation hub' that aimsto promote digital transformation in Rwanda by investing in digital solutions andfostering collaborative working relationships between government, the privatesector, academia and civil society organisations. Since its establishment in 2019,the DTC has supported various projects that support implementation of Rwanda's National AI Strategy, including AI literacy and digital skills programmes andpromoting knowledge sharing between the public and private sector to developtech-driven solutions to Rwanda's developmental priorities.
